# Hackathons
The secret sauce that CS 196 runs on is student engagement and excitement. We leverage student affect for both the microlessons and the project assignments. Other chances to bring more excitement to the students are valuable. Inspired by the hackathons on college campuses becoming more popular, we organize our own hackathons for students in CS 196 to work on their projects and have a fun time while doing so.

In the common sense, hackathons are cross between a convention and a competition where dozens to hundreds of college students meet up, form teams, and build a program or app in twenty-four or thirty-six caffiene-infused hours. Often, software companies come to recruit or give their own prizes.

We translate this hackathon mentality to CS 196 in our own hackathons. Students need to be working on their own project with their own team, so we do not adopt the teamforming and project ideating steps, but we do provide food and drinks. Some local companies have joined us for a few of the hackathons to see our students coding in a realistic environment.

We schedule the hackathons for Saturday or Sunday afternoons so that many students are available. The students are not required to attend the hackathons, but we do explain what they are, why we do them, and highly recommend that they attend. As the semester progresses, less students attend hackathons. In the spring of 2015, about 80% of students attended the first hackathon, and only half attended the second. The students that do attend report they are surprised at how productive they can be in just a few hours.