## Microlessons

Having pitched the class as an introduction for complete beginners, we now had to deliver on that promise. On the staff side, microlessons began with a simple desire: "We want the students to know a little about X so they can be prepared when they build Y." We knew the subjects we'd like to cover from the project topics the semester before. We designed the microlesson model to provide students with the breadth of computer science by empowerment, experimentation, and enrichment in microlessons that range from the first introduction to programming to senior-level elective topics.

Microlessons are short, twenty- to forty-minute lectures that cover a broad topic in computer science. We call them _microlessons_ because we make no attempt to provide a self-contained package of coverage of the topic. Instead, we aim for goals introduced below.

The first goal is _empowerment_. We want students not to be intimidated by the material and to understand they *can* work with the topic being covered. The second goal is experimentation. Students should understand the context of this field or tool, and consequently gauge their interest in future work with this topic. Last is enrichment. If the students are interested in further work, the student should know where to go to continue developing their interest.
These goals are manifest differently depending on the specificity of the lecture.

At first, the microlessons were aimed at some skill set that students would be using for their projects. These kinds of microlessons were common especially in the first few weeks, when we wanted to get students up to speed in the content of the class. The first microlesson was a crash course to programming in Python. Later, we covered mobile development, web design, running a server, and other topics useful to most students.

Midway through the semester, we shifted our focus. In covering topics like algorithms and data structures, we wanted to prepare them for writing code in their projects, but also begin familiarizing them to topics they'd see repeatedly in the next four years, including data structures, computer architecture, and algorithms.

As the semester progressed, we started our shift to more esoteric topics. With the disparate student projects, there was no way we could choose a topic relevant to every student. We opted for a whirlwind tour of senior-level courses. We wanted to talk about computer architecture, machine learning, and dynamic programming, but how could we do so to some first-year students, albeit smart and motivated ones? We decided to formalize the idea of the "microlesson." We needed to understand the causes of this change in lecture style. What allowed us to modify the standard class model?

Because this is an optional add-on course, our learning outcomes can be far more general than the technical knowledge we provide. The students from CS 196 do not take the class to learn big-O notation or Java's abstract classes, though most of them have a passing familiarity with them. In addition to freedom in learning outcomes, the optional nature of the class meant the students involved had, in general, a higher level of motivation. We could trust the students with more freedom than we would normally consider. However, we added the difficulty of lecturing on senior-level topics we worried the students would find intimidating. We modified the lecture format we experienced in classes to meet these changing requirements.

First, we were concerned that the material we chose to cover would be intimidating. There were senior-level classes about this, and we're teaching them this three months into a freshman course. In response, we cited point #1, empowerment. Different lecturers had different methods of achieving this, but we were confident in the lecturer's ability to execute on this point. Some lecturers showed a simple example, or demonstrated how the basic principles of such-and-such field were intuitive and encountered on a daily basis.

Second, we were aware that most students would not be using most of the information we would be giving - but some would. In response, we changed the learning outcome we expected of all students. We admitted that some of what we covered would not help them in their projects and may not ever come up again in the four years of university student. We could, however, tell students to focus on the use cases of the tool or their interest in the field, because, as students, we have been surprised at the seemingly useless skills that come in handy in an unrelated field.

Lastly, we could not cover enough material to give an accurate picture of the field we wanted to cover. Like point #2, we admitted this was truly the case. By leveraging the student's motivation, we could reasonably expect students interested beyond the experiment state to follow up with some additional [short] project as long as we provided the direction. In the Fall 2015 semester, we added Hackerspace, detailed in the next section, to specifically address this last point.

Microlessons are the assistant and complement of the projects and provide students with knowledge of the breadth of computer science. The voluntary but short class model we had changes to the lecture model were necessary, and we decided that empowerment, experiment, and expanding were our goals. The staff believes that the lecturers have executed on these goals well and microlessons have been a positive part of CS 196.