#Projects

If there were a singular idea at the heart of this experiment of CS 196, it would be the semester projects. Until midway through the second semester, when we formally defined our approach to microlessons, all parts of CS 196 were oriented towards the learning outcomes of the project. In fact, the nicknames for the first two semesters of CS 196 - "The Foundry" and "DotStar" [^1] - reference the projects. Our learning outcomes are for students to learn on their own, to begin and develop soft skills like teamwork and technical communication, and to become confident in future projects.

Why did CS 196 aim for these goals when other classes would not? From the start, CS 196 had freedom to dissociate from specific topics and domain knowledge. Without material in mind, students became free to choose the material they worked with, naturally leading to greater depth in the work they did. Without needing to ensure each student understood some set of material, the same for each student, we never needed individual assessments. Working in groups became obvious. The development and the details of the team project requirement illustrate both the depth and the soft skills we teach.

The projects are defined by the students and begin in the second to fourth week and continue until the end of the semester. Team sizes have varied by semester between three and twelve students, and though the team structure has varied as well, each team has had a member of staff called a project manager organize team meetings and helps the team to define its responsibilities. The project manager responsibilities and experiences are detailed in the [Team Leading](team_leading.md)  section. 

From the first semester of the class, Fall 2014, students pitched and worked on the projects they chose themselves. We asked the students for feedback at the end of the course. The prime draw to the course, and the quality students were happiest about, was that students could choose the project they wanted to do.
  
We allow students to choose their project with as little staff intervention as possible. When it came time to pitch the Spring 2015 version of CS 196, we used the example of our self-driving car team. Naturally, we didn't have the resources, time, or skills to build a self-driving car, but after team discussion, they pivoted[^2]. They chose to simulate many self-driving cars on a road network, and they testing what sorts of algorithms led to the best traffic times. The students still maintained their enthusiasm, and now they had a reasonable project. We find that encouraging students to "take the jewel, not the crown," and letting them pare down their exciting original idea into a more practical project leads to more excited teams, better ideas, and a useful skill.

The excitement that students bring to a chosen project allows them to pursue their project with greater depth. In the course of their projects, students become acquainted with tools, skills, and concepts that are normally only taught in senior-level courses. Furthermore, the students are not given some text to read or lab report to follow. They have given themselves an end goal to build, and they must map out their process along the way. Project mentors are available to orient the students and guide the students if they ask, but they do not build assignments or ensure a student knows a particular topic. Students "learn how to learn" from non-guided sources like a website, a paper, or a textbook.

The training in depth, as well as the soft skills that come from working it teams, give confidence to students if they want to pursue further projects. They have faced intimidating walls of code and mathematical notations before, and they've understood it enough to build a product. Learning to accept the give-and-take of the initial idea phase with the execution phase is a valuable skill to keep students motivated when they run into difficulty in their own projects.

The team projects are the most memorable part of CS 196 and have earned some students internships and spots in undergraduate research. Projects build upon students' initial enthusiasm and ideas in order to teach depth, soft skills, and confidence.

[^1]: DotStar is a reference to a "regular expression", a shorthand way to represent strings. In this regular expression language, the dot "." represents any letter, and the star "\*" says there can be any number of the preceding character. Combined, this means that ".\*" represents any number of any letters. We chose this nickname to illustrate we would accept any idea students wanted to work on.

[^2]: Pivoting is a term most commonly used in the startup scene. It is a "structured course correction designed to test a new fundamental hypothesis about the product, strategy, and engine of growth." It takes its name from a pivot in basketball, where a player keeps one foot on the ground but moves with the other in order to put herself or himself in a better position without dribbling the ball.