# Team Forming
Once students have pitched their ideas, it is the time for team forming. In each semester, we learn that making these teams is neither as easy or as important as we think it is.

Team Forming decides what students work on which project. It is a necessary step of any group project. In some other classes, the teams are chosen by mutual agreement among the students. Because of the student demographics in CS 196, we do not choose this route. In both the spring and the fall, CS 196 students do not know many of their peers. In the fall, they are first-semester freshman, and in the spring, the class is mainly non-majors. In addition, the balance of power shifts from mutual agreement in favor of the creator of the idea.

In CS 196, the most commonly discussed algorithm for this team forming process is simply asking each student's preferences on different teams and assigning students such that as many get their first preference as possible. This appeals to the computer scientist's intuition of this assignment as an optimization problem. 

For one semester, we wrote a matching program based on the Stable Marriage algorithm, and emailed students the "final" decisions. There was a bug in the program, and students received each telling them to join a different team. Needless to say, it was a messy situation. Merely because some problem feels like it has a mathematical solution doesn't mean the manual solution isn't practical.

As project managers, we have noticed the anti-pattern of teamwork when one or two talented students did a lot of work and leave the other students in the dust. We wonder if we could solve this situation by ensuring the students on a particular team were similar in skill level. We plan to test this in the spring of 2017.

Lastly, keep in mind the scope of this issue. Even a manual assignment will allow most students to find a team they like. Because the preferences gathered by a simple survey aren't fully accurate, a mathematical solution is not much better. In fact, no student at the end of the semester has expressed to me they wanted to and should have been on a different team. I don't mean to say it does not happen, but that other rough edges in the class take precedence.